README.md, before:

# `simfil`

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Coverage-HTML-orange)](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://gist.githubusercontent.com/johannes-wolf/61e57af50757b03e0c7cd119ec2d2f4b/raw/ed28c457ebc09ce8ddddc9cec6668e130d59b64c/coverage.html)
[![](https://gist.githubusercontent.com/johannes-wolf/61e57af50757b03e0c7cd119ec2d2f4b/raw/0ae49c7509dea18b4c110b8bf416f2715a214933/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Klebert-Engineering/simfil)

`simfil` is a C++ 20 library and a language for querying structured map feature data. The library provides an efficient in-memory storage pool for map data, optimized for the `simfil` query language, along with a query interpreter to query the actual data.

Although `simfil` is made for querying map feature data, it is easy to plug in custom data models, such as the generic JSON interface the library also comes with.

## Design Considerations

- **Simplicity**: the language should be very simple but yet powerful to allow for complex queries.
- **Speed**: querying models should be fast and scale to multiple cores.
- **Efficiency**: the internal model should be memory efficient, as `simfil` is designed to query huge amounts of data.

## Query Language

For details about the language see the [Language Guide](simfil-language.md).

### Examples

All examples shown below can be executed by loading the json file [`examples/example.json`](examples/example.json) using the interactive command line tool `<builddir>/repl/simfil-repl INPUT` (see [Using the Interactive Command Line Tool](#Using the Interactive Command Line Tool)).

#### All person's names

```
*.name
```
```
John
Angelika
Franz
```

#### All persons older than 30 years using a [subquery](simfil-language.md#sub-queries)
Subqueries, denoted by braces `{...}` can be used as predicates for the current object. Insides a subquery, the current value is accessible through the special name `_`.
```
*.{age > 30}.name
```
```
Angelika
Franz
```

#### Combining name and surname constructing a temporary value using string [concatenation](simfil-language.md#operators)
```
*.(name + " " + surname)
```
```
John Doe
Angelika Musterfrau
Franz Eder
```

#### All persons with attribute "A" > 0 using nested subqueries
```
*.{attribs.*.{id == "A" and value > 0}}.name
```
```
Franz
```

#### Find Primes in Range 1 to 25
Some types have special operators. The type `irange` supports the unpack operator `...` to expand its list of values.
```
range(1,25)...{count((_ % range(1,_)...) == 0) == 2}
```
```
2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23
```

## Building the Project
`simfil` uses CMake as build system and can be built using all three major compilers, GCC, Clang and MSVC.

### With FetchContent
```sh
mkdir -p build && cd build
cmake .. -DSIMFIL_WITH_TESTS=ON -DSIMFIL_WITH_REPL=ON && cmake --build .
ctest
```

## Using the Interactive Command Line Tool
The project contains an interactive command line program (repl: “Read-Eval-Print-Loop”) to test queries against a JSON datasource: `simfil-repl`.

```sh
<build-dir>/repl/simfil-repl <json-file>
```

All of the example queries above can be tested by loading [example.json](examples/example.json):
```sh
<buil-dir>/repl/simfil-repl <worktree>/examples/example.json
```

The repl provides some extra commands for testing queries:
- `/any` Toggle wrapping input with an `any(...)` call to only get boolean results (default `off`)
- `/mt` Toggle multithreading (default `on`)
- `/verbose` Toggle verbosity (default `on`)

## Extending the Language
The query language can be extended by additional functions and addititonal types.

## Using the Library
### CMake FetchContent
To link against `simfil` vial CMake, all you have to do is to add the following to you `CMakeLists.txt`:
```cmake
# Using CMakes FetchContent
FetchContent_Declare(simfil
  GIT_REPOSITORY "https://github.com/Klebert-Engineering/simfil.git"
  GIT_TAG        "main"
  GIT_SHALLOW    ON)
FetchContent_MakeAvailable(simfil)

# Link against the simfil target
target_link_libraries(<my-app> PUBLIC simfil)
```

### Minimal Usage Example
```c++
#include "simfil/simfil.h"
#include "simfil/model/model.h"
#include "simfil/model/string-pool.h"

// Shared string pool used for string interning
auto strings = std::make_shared<simfil::StringPool>();

// Declare a model with one object
auto model = std::make_shared<simfil::ModelPool>(strings);

auto obj = model->newObject();
obj->addField("name", "demo");
model->addRoot(obj);

// Compilation and evaluation environment
// to register custom functions or callbacks.
auto env = simfil::Environment{strings};

// Compile query string to a simfil::Expression.
auto query = simfil::compile(env, "name", false);

// Evalualte query and get result of type simfil::Value.
auto result = simfil::eval(env, *query, *model, nullptr);

for (auto&& value : result)
    std::cout << value.toString() << "\n";
```

The full source of the example can be found [here](./examples/minimal/main.cpp).

## Dependencies
- [nlohmann/json](https://github.com/nlohmann/json) for JSON model support (switch: `SIMFIL_WITH_MODEL_JSON`, default: `YES`).
- [fraillt/bitsery](https://github.com/fraillt/bitsery) for binary en- and decoding.
- [slavenf/sfl-library](https://github.com/slavenf/sfl-library.git) for small and segmented vector containers.
- [fmtlib/fmt](https://github.com/fmtlib/fmt) string formatting library.

Commit message:

docs: Mention diagnostics in the docs

README.md, after:

# `simfil`

[![](https://img.shields.io/badge/Coverage-HTML-orange)](https://htmlpreview.github.io/?https://gist.githubusercontent.com/johannes-wolf/61e57af50757b03e0c7cd119ec2d2f4b/raw/ed28c457ebc09ce8ddddc9cec6668e130d59b64c/coverage.html)
[![](https://gist.githubusercontent.com/johannes-wolf/61e57af50757b03e0c7cd119ec2d2f4b/raw/0ae49c7509dea18b4c110b8bf416f2715a214933/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Klebert-Engineering/simfil)

`simfil` is a C++ 20 library and a language for querying structured map feature data. The library provides an efficient in-memory storage pool for map data, optimized for the `simfil` query language, along with a query interpreter to query the actual data.

Although `simfil` is made for querying map feature data, it is easy to plug in custom data models, such as the generic JSON interface the library also comes with.

## Design Considerations

- **Simplicity**: the language should be very simple but yet powerful to allow for complex queries.
- **Speed**: querying models should be fast and scale to multiple cores.
- **Efficiency**: the internal model should be memory efficient, as `simfil` is designed to query huge amounts of data.

## Query Language

For details about the language see the [Language Guide](simfil-language.md).

### Examples

All examples shown below can be executed by loading the json file [`examples/example.json`](examples/example.json) using the interactive command line tool `<builddir>/repl/simfil-repl INPUT` (see [Using the Interactive Command Line Tool](#Using the Interactive Command Line Tool)).

#### All person's names

```
*.name
```
```
John
Angelika
Franz
```

#### All persons older than 30 years using a [subquery](simfil-language.md#sub-queries)
Subqueries, denoted by braces `{...}` can be used as predicates for the current object. Insides a subquery, the current value is accessible through the special name `_`.
```
*.{age > 30}.name
```
```
Angelika
Franz
```

#### Combining name and surname constructing a temporary value using string [concatenation](simfil-language.md#operators)
```
*.(name + " " + surname)
```
```
John Doe
Angelika Musterfrau
Franz Eder
```

#### All persons with attribute "A" > 0 using nested subqueries
```
*.{attribs.*.{id == "A" and value > 0}}.name
```
```
Franz
```

#### Find Primes in Range 1 to 25
Some types have special operators. The type `irange` supports the unpack operator `...` to expand its list of values.
```
range(1,25)...{count((_ % range(1,_)...) == 0) == 2}
```
```
2, 3, 5, 7, 11, 13, 17, 19, 23
```

## Building the Project
`simfil` uses CMake as build system and can be built using all three major compilers, GCC, Clang and MSVC.

### With FetchContent
```sh
mkdir -p build && cd build
cmake .. -DSIMFIL_WITH_TESTS=ON -DSIMFIL_WITH_REPL=ON && cmake --build .
ctest
```

## Using the Interactive Command Line Tool
The project contains an interactive command line program (repl: “Read-Eval-Print-Loop”) to test queries against a JSON datasource: `simfil-repl`.

```sh
<build-dir>/repl/simfil-repl <json-file>
```

All of the example queries above can be tested by loading [example.json](examples/example.json):
```sh
<buil-dir>/repl/simfil-repl <worktree>/examples/example.json
```

The repl provides some extra commands for testing queries:
- `/any` Toggle wrapping input with an `any(...)` call to only get boolean results (default `off`)
- `/mt` Toggle multithreading (default `on`)
- `/verbose` Toggle verbosity (default `on`)

## Extending the Language
The query language can be extended by additional functions and addititonal types.

## Diagnostics
Simfil can output query diagnostics messages that can include a fixed query string.
Currently, it supports the following types of messages:
- "No matches for field '...'. Did you mean '...'?"

## Using the Library
### CMake FetchContent
To link against `simfil` vial CMake, all you have to do is to add the following to you `CMakeLists.txt`:
```cmake
# Using CMakes FetchContent
FetchContent_Declare(simfil
  GIT_REPOSITORY "https://github.com/Klebert-Engineering/simfil.git"
  GIT_TAG        "main"
  GIT_SHALLOW    ON)
FetchContent_MakeAvailable(simfil)

# Link against the simfil target
target_link_libraries(<my-app> PUBLIC simfil)
```

### Minimal Usage Example
```c++
#include "simfil/simfil.h"
#include "simfil/model/model.h"
#include "simfil/model/string-pool.h"

// Shared string pool used for string interning
auto strings = std::make_shared<simfil::StringPool>();

// Declare a model with one object
auto model = std::make_shared<simfil::ModelPool>(strings);

auto obj = model->newObject();
obj->addField("name", "demo");
model->addRoot(obj);

// Compilation and evaluation environment
// to register custom functions or callbacks.
auto env = simfil::Environment{strings};

// Compile query string to a simfil::Expression.
auto query = simfil::compile(env, "name", false);

// Evalualte query and get result of type simfil::Value.
auto result = simfil::eval(env, *query, *model, nullptr);

for (auto&& value : result)
    std::cout << value.toString() << "\n";
```

The full source of the example can be found [here](./examples/minimal/main.cpp).

## Dependencies
- [nlohmann/json](https://github.com/nlohmann/json) for JSON model support (switch: `SIMFIL_WITH_MODEL_JSON`, default: `YES`).
- [fraillt/bitsery](https://github.com/fraillt/bitsery) for binary en- and decoding.
- [slavenf/sfl-library](https://github.com/slavenf/sfl-library.git) for small and segmented vector containers.
- [fmtlib/fmt](https://github.com/fmtlib/fmt) string formatting library.
